                                        Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025




                                        PersonaEval: Are LLM Evaluators Human Enough to Judge
                                        Role-Play?

                                            Lingfeng Zhou1 , Jialing Zhang1 , Jin Gao1 , Mohan Jiang1,2 , Dequan Wang1,2 ∗
                                            1 Shanghai Jiao Tong University   2 Shanghai Innovation Institute




                                                                                  Abstract
                                                  Current role-play studies often rely on unvalidated LLM-as-a-judge
                                                  paradigms, which may fail to reflect how humans perceive role fidelity. A




arXiv:2508.10014v1 [cs.CL] 6 Aug 2025
                                                  key prerequisite for human-aligned evaluation is role identification, the
                                                  ability to recognize who is speaking based on dialogue context. We argue
                                                  that any meaningful judgment of role-playing quality (how well a character
                                                  is played) fundamentally depends on first correctly attributing words and
                                                  actions to the correct persona (who is speaking). We present PersonaEval,
                                                  the first benchmark designed to test whether LLM evaluators can reliably
                                                  identify human roles. PersonaEval uses human-authored dialogues from
                                                  novels, scripts, and video transcripts, challenging models to determine the
                                                  correct persona according to the conversation context. Our experiments,
                                                  including a human study, show that even the best-performing LLMs reach
                                                  only around 69% accuracy, well below the level needed for reliable eval-
                                                  uation. In contrast, human participants perform near ceiling with 90.8%
                                                  accuracy, highlighting that current LLM evaluators are still not human
                                                  enough to effectively judge role-play scenarios. To better understand this
                                                  gap, we examine training-time adaptation and test-time compute, suggest-
                                                  ing that reliable evaluation requires more than task-specific tuning, but
                                                  depends on strong, human-like reasoning abilities in LLM evaluators. We
                                                  release our benchmark at https://github.com/maple-zhou/PersonaEval.


                                        1     Introduction
                                        A growing body of work in role-play adopts LLM-as-a-judge paradigms, where models are
                                        tasked with evaluating the role-playing behavior of other models (Shao et al., 2023; Wang
                                        et al., 2024c; 2025b; Lu et al., 2024). While scalable, this strategy assumes that large language
                                        models (LLMs) can approximate human judgment, a claim that remains largely untested.
                                        This gap in validation raises concerns about the reliability and true human-alignment of
                                        current evaluation pipelines. Recent studies have already revealed misalignment between
                                        LLMs and human, including preference leakage (Ghasemi et al., 2025; Murugadoss et al.,
                                        2024), where models favor outputs from their own model family. What’s more, Zhao et al.
                                        (2025) show that one token is enough to fool LLM judges. In a broader cognitive sense, Josh
                                        Tenenbaum argues that LLMs derive intelligence from language, while humans develop
                                        language after acquiring intelligence (Cherian et al., 2024). These gaps call into question
                                        whether current LLMs can reliably assess role fidelity in a human-like way.
                                        A key prerequisite for human-aligned evaluation is the ability to identify the speaker’s role
                                        from context. We argue this is a foundational capability: an LLM cannot credibly assess
                                        how well a role is portrayed if it cannot first determine who is speaking. This is because
                                        accurate identification is essential for grounding the interpretation of dialogue and avoiding
                                        critical errors, such as misattributing behaviors or inconsistencies to the wrong speaker.
                                        Such failures ultimately compromise the fairness and precision of the entire evaluation
                                        process, making role identification a minimal, yet objective, test of alignment with human.
                                        To examine this, we introduce PersonaEval, the first benchmark for evaluating whether
                                        LLMs can reliably identify character roles from dialogue context. The task is formulated
                                             ∗ Corresponding author: dequanwang@sjtu.edu.cn



                                                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025




     Content Grading
         Multi-Agent Judgment        Broadly Used                       Truly Qualified?
                                     in Role-play
     Pairwise Comparison
                                                    LLM Evaluator


    PersonaEval                                                     Gemini-2.5-pro-0605
            Why doesn’t Ron                                    A. Hermione Granger (Chosen)
            understand how…                           Select
                                     A      B                  B. Ginny Weasley
    Harry
                                                               C. Ron Weasley (Correct)
      I need to be careful                                     D. Harry Potter
      here. I don’t want…
                                     C      D
                                                     Easy for human, but the latest model fails!


Figure 1: LLM-as-a-judge paradigms are broadly used in role-play evaluation, while its re-
liability has not been verified. We propose PersonaEval, the first benchmark to investigate a
necessary condition for human-aligned LLM evaluators of role-play: accurate identification
of roles from dialogue context. We find that even the latest model Gemini-2.5-pro-06052 fails
the case which is easy for humans (Section 4.3), indicating the challenge remains unsolved.


as a constrained classification: given a dialogue snippet and four candidate roles, the
evaluator must select the role most consistent with the target utterance (Figure 1). We
ground our evaluation in human judgment by curating instances from human-authored
materials—including novels, scripts, and transcripts—and supplement them with detailed
role descriptions to mitigate potential LLM knowledge gaps.
Our experiments reveal a clear limitation of LLMs. State-of-the-art LLMs achieve no more
than 69% accuracy on PersonaEval, which falls short of meeting a convincing baseline for
reliable assessment, and even the latest model fails on trivial cases (Figure 1). In contrast,
human participants achieve 90.8% accuracy. These findings offer a clear answer to the
question in our title: LLM evaluators are not yet “human enough” to judge role-play.
To understand what makes a better human-aligned LLM evaluator, we investigate two
common strategies: training-time adaptation and test-time compute. Surprisingly, we find
fine-tuning LLMs with role-play data does not improve performance and can even degrade
it, suggesting that memorizing role-specific knowledge is insufficient. In contrast, test-time
methods show more potential. Notably, reasoning models consistently outperform others.
These results suggest that strong role-play evaluation depends less on simple heuristics
and more on robust, context-aware reasoning. Accurately judging roles requires inference,
perspective-taking, and social understanding—skills more aligned with human judgment
than with pattern matching. Taken together, our findings point to test-time compute,
particularly inference-time reasoning, as a promising direction for building LLM evaluators
of role-play that better reflect human-like judgment. Our main contributions are as follows:

     • We introduce PersonaEval, the first benchmark to directly evaluate whether LLMs
       can identify human roles from natural dialogue, a necessary but underexplored
       foundation for reliable role-play evaluation.
     • We demonstrate that state-of-the-art LLMs fall short of human-level performance on
       role identification, revealing a critical gap in their ability to reflect human judgment.
     • We find that reliable role-play evaluation depends not on role-specific training or
       prompting, but on reasoning ability, highlighting test-time compute especially rea-
       soning as a promising strategy for building more human-aligned LLM evaluators.
  2 This experiment was performed in June 2025, when Gemini-2.5-pro-0605 was the latest model.



                                                2
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025




2   Related Work
Role-playing Evaluation Role-playing is essential for aligning large language models
(LLMs) with human values, which positions human experts as the gold standard for evalua-
tion, just like what early LLM role-play studies do (Zhou et al., 2023). However, the vast
scale of modern role-playing systems makes thorough human evaluation impractical due
to high costs and delays. Therefore, some works (Lu et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2024a;b) turn
to traditional metrics of natural language generation tasks, including BLEU and ROUGE.
These metrics compute similarities between the reference text and the generated content.
Yet in the domain of role-play, ground truth is always uncertain, since there are multiple
possible correct responses. As a result, researchers gradually shift to reference-free evalua-
tion. Some works train a reward model to estimate the quality of generated responses (Tu
et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2025; Dai et al., 2024). More and more works are using LLMs as judges
to evaluate the quality of role-play content from a human perspective (Gusev, 2024; Wang
et al., 2024c), benefiting from their strong generalization ability and capacity to provide more
comprehensive and fine-grained feedback. While some of them leverage LLM evaluators
in a reference-guided way (Zhou et al., 2024a; Yu et al., 2024), most utilize LLMs to score
from diverse dimensions (Yang et al., 2025; Lu et al., 2025; Zhou et al., 2024a; Shao et al.,
2023) or execute pairwise comparisons (AI, 2024; Wu et al., 2025). Among them, Wang et al.
(2025b) even builds a multi-agent system to make the final judgment. To avoid the subjec-
tivity bias originated from scoring, some works let LLM evaluators perform multi-class
classification (Lu et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2024).
These approaches aim to assess how effectively LLMs play specific roles, contributing
to a broader understanding of their performance in role-playing scenarios. However,
challenges remain in ensuring that evaluation results are both reliable and aligned with
human expectations of role adherence.

Evaluating LLM Evaluator The reliability of LLMs as evaluators is gaining increasing
attention in the community (Son et al., 2024a; Wei et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024). Researchers
start by testing the instruction-following abilities of LLMs in their role as evaluators. Zheng
et al. (2023) addresses this issue by using advanced LLMs to assess performance on open-
ended questions. Wang et al. (2023) approach ChatGPT as a human-like evaluator by
providing task-specific (e.g., summarization) and aspect-specific (e.g., relevance) instruc-
tions to prompt ChatGPT for evaluating the outputs of various NLG (Natural Language
Generation) models. Murugadoss et al. (2024) explores whether LLM assessments are based
purely on prompt instructions or also reflect inherent preferences for high-quality data
similar to their fine-tuning data. There are also various meta-evaluation studies of LLMs
with different focuses. Chern et al. (2024) evaluates LLM evaluators through multi-agent
debates, while Son et al. (2024b) and Hada et al. (2024) propose multilingual benchmarks.
Eiras et al. (2025) carefully examines the safety-related aspects of LLM judges. Zhou et al.
(2024b) pays attention to the domain of paper review, while Wang et al. (2025a) cares about
the performance of LLM evaluators in software engineering.
Although interest in the meta-evaluation of LLMs is growing, the specific evaluation of
LLMs as role-play evaluators remains underexplored. While some work (Yang et al., 2025)
includes ablation studies to examine alignment between LLM evaluators and human experts,
there is still a lack of a systematic perspective on meta-evaluating role-play LLM evaluators,
particularly regarding their ability to distinguish between nuanced role identities. Yet this
ability is fundamental to higher-order role-play evaluation; without it, any subsequent
judgment of role fidelity rests on an unstable and unverified foundation, revealing a critical
gap in our understanding of how well LLMs can perform human-aligned assessment.

3   PersonaEval
We design PersonaEval to test whether large language models (LLMs) can perform human-
like judgment in a core subtask of role-play evaluation: identifying who a speaker is based
on dialogue context. To build a reliable benchmark for role identification, we start by formu-
lating the task as a constrained classification problem (Section 3.1), then construct diverse,


                                               3
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025




                    tokens ≥ 25
                                  Dialogue Pool
                                                                               Prompt to LLMs         Hard Case Curation
                                                      Dialogue Context         Instruction:              confidence < 0.5
                                  Why doesn’t Ron
                                                                               Analyze the conver-
                                  understand how…                                                       PersonaEval
                        Harry                                                  sation and choose
                                                                   Embedding   the matched role…       • Literary: 26,208 cases
 Authentic Human-        I need to be careful        Encoder                                           • Drama: 1,658 cases
  originated Data        here. I don’t want…                                    Candidate Roles        • Expertise: 699 cases
      • Novels                         Groundtruth   shared
                                                                       0
      • Scripts
                                                     Encoder                                  Top-3 roles with highest cosine-
      • Videos                                                          …
                                   Role Pool                                                  similarity to Groundtruth



Figure 2: Curation pipeline of PersonaEval. PersonaEval evaluates role identification ability
of LLM evaluators via a constrained classification task built on human-authored dialogues
from novels, scripts, and videos. Each instance includes a two-turn conversation: the first
turn is from a known character, and the second is from a target character whose identity is to
be predicted by LLMs. The ground truth role’s embedding is used to retrieve the top-3 most
similar roles from a candidate pool, forming a challenging candidate set. A standardized
prompt (See Appendix A) presents the dialogue and candidate roles to LLMs. To ensure
difficulty, only instances where a strong baseline model (Qwen-max) shows low confidence
in the correct answer are retained. The final benchmark includes three tracks—PersonaEval-
Literary (26,208), PersonaEval-Drama (1,658), and PersonaEval-Expertise (699).


human-authored datasets that capture role-play across different domains (Section 3.2). To
increase challenge and minimize shortcut cues, we design semantically similar adversarial
distractors (Section 3.3). Finally, we apply a hard case curation pipeline (Section 3.4). See
Figure 2 for the complete curation pipeline.

3.1     Task Formulation

PersonaEval adopts a classification framework to evaluate role identification capabilities
in LLMs. Each instance presents a two-turn dialogue between two characters: Character1
(with a known identity) and Character2 (whose identity is to be inferred). Models are
given the dialogue context and four candidate roles (five for expertise-level settings, see
Section 3.3), each accompanied by a detailed profile. Evaluators assign confidence scores
to each candidate, with higher scores indicating stronger belief in a match. To mitigate
positional bias, candidate order is randomized. This design turns an inherently subjective
task into a verifiable one, using deterministic ground truth derived from source materials.
The full prompt is provided in Appendix A.
While this setting may appear less common, this is largely because prior work has often
implicitly assumed that LLMs possess such basic capabilities. Our intention is to carefully
examine this assumption and bridge a gap that, to our knowledge, has been under-explored.
Nonetheless, normally in a role-play conversation, the context we have is more than just 2
turns. We agree that extending evaluations to richer, multi-turn contexts is important, and
we view our work as a necessary first step toward that broader goal.

3.2     Data Composition

PersonaEval includes three tracks, each targeting different facets of role understanding:

         • PersonaEval-Literary: Built on 26,208 dialogues from 771 English novels, this
           track tests persona inference in fictional narratives. The data are curated from
           CoSER (Wang et al., 2025b), a verified fiction-based dataset containing texts from
           classic and modern novels.
         • PersonaEval-Drama: This track contains 1,658 Chinese dialogue snippets from
           screenplays, testing models’ ability to understand role alignment in scripted in-


                                                               4
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025




        teractions. The data are adapted from the partially open-source CharacterEval
        datasets (Tu et al., 2024).
      • PersonaEval-Expertise: Sourced from the Wired “5 Levels” video series3 , this
        track features 699 scaffolded explanations where domain experts tailor content to
        audiences of different knowledge levels (Child, Teen, College Student, Graduate
        Student, and Expert). Dialogues test whether models can infer a speaker’s intended
        audience based on linguistic and conceptual cues, without relying on specialized
        domain knowledge.

Together, these tracks ensure coverage across fictional, performative, and instructional
domains. Literary texts emphasize character personality and inner thoughts, while scripts
focus more on conversational style, and instructional videos involve role-audience align-
ment. This diversity helps mitigate domain-specific bias to some extent.
Importantly, all source data are human-authored, avoiding contamination from synthetic
model-generated content. This design choice ensures evaluation aligns with human, as
public datasets increasingly overlap with prior model outputs.
We also balance language diversity with the availability and quality of human-authored
materials, providing two English tracks and one Chinese track. English resources, especially
literary novels, are more abundant and varied, allowing us to construct robust, high-quality
benchmarks. At the same time, we include a Chinese track to introduce linguistic and
cultural diversity, recognizing the importance of evaluating models in non-English contexts.
Since some materials may not be included in the pretraining corpus of LLMs, we provide
detailed role descriptions, including both basic traits and nuanced plot-related context.
This helps ensure that role identification performance reflects reasoning ability rather than
missing background knowledge, minimizing the impact of knowledge gaps.

3.3   Adversarial Distractor Construction

To ensure each instance presents a genuine reasoning challenge, we construct adversar-
ial distractors that are semantically close to the correct role. As shown in Figure 2, for
PersonaEval-Literary and PersonaEval-Drama, we embed all candidate role profiles us-
ing three independently trained models to avoid bias from single model structure: Ope-
nAI’s text-embedding-3-small (OpenAI, 2024), BGE-M3 (Chen et al., 2024), and Sentence-
BERT’s (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019) multilingual distiluse-base-multilingual-cased-v14 . For
each instance, we compute cosine similarity between the ground-truth role profile and all
others in the pool. From each embedding model, we select the top non-target role (i.e.,
most similar but incorrect) and use these to form a distractor set of three, ensuring diverse
but challenging contrastive options. This forces evaluators to resolve subtle, human-level
ambiguities, rather than rely on surface heuristics.
In the PersonaEval-Expertise track, we leverage the fixed five-tier role hierarchy (Child
to Expert). Each dialogue uses the four incorrect levels as distractors, reflecting authentic
educational scaffolding challenges without needing embedding-based selection. All options
are paired with audience-specific profiles drawn from the original video transcripts.
Across all tracks, we avoid synthetic perturbations and instead build distractors from
naturally occurring human roles. This ensures that the task tests real-world ambiguity
resolution, not artificial contrastive tricks.

3.4   Hard Case Curation

We observe that the original unfiltered data contain numerous trivial cases (e.g., direct name
mentions, simple greetings) that do not genuinely test role inference. To avoid inflating
performance with trivial cases and ensure the benchmark focuses on meaningful reasoning,
we explicitly filter for difficult instances where even strong models struggle. Our goal is not
   3 https://www.wired.com/video/series/5-levels
   4 https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/distiluse-base-multilingual-cased-v1



                                               5
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025




broad coverage, but a focused evaluation of whether models can resolve subtle, human-level
ambiguities. We apply a two-stage filtering process:

Stage 1: Low-Information Filtering We remove dialogue turns where Character2’s utter-
ance is under 25 tokens. These low-information responses (e.g., “Exactly.”) offer little basis
for role inference and are excluded to maintain meaningful task complexity.

Stage 2: Confidence-Based Filtering Using Qwen-max (Bai et al., 2023), we filter out
instances where the model shows high confidence in the correct answer. Specifically, we
discard any instance where Qwen-max assigns over 50% confidence to the ground-truth
role. From an initial pool of over 110,000 instances, this filtering yields 28,565 challenging
examples, each requiring inference beyond surface-level cues. Nonetheless, this confidence-
based filtering may introduce systematic bias. More discussion can be found in Appendix B.


4              Experiment

We organize our experimental analysis into four parts. We first evaluate model performance
on PersonaEval (Section 4.1), then analyze the impact of reasoning ability of LLMs (Sec-
tion 4.2), present case studies (Section 4.3), and conclude with a human study (Section 4.4).
Since prior work often uses competent large language models (LLMs) like GPT-3.5 and
GPT-4 as role-play evaluators (Shao et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2024), we evaluate a diverse set
of state-of-the-art models, including several reasoning ones rarely considered in existing
role-play studies. Model versions are specified in Appendix C. We report classification
accuracy (top-1 accuracy) as the primary metric for model performance.

4.1              Main Results on Role Identification with PersonaEval

Figure 3 summarizes model performance across the three tracks of PersonaEval. Most LLMs
achieve around 40-60% accuracy, including the latest GLM-4.5, and even the best-performing
model, Gemini-2.5-pro (03-25 version, as detailed in Appendix C), reaches only 68.8%, well
below human-level performance (see Section 4.4). These findings reveal a significant gap
between current LLMs and the requirement of consistent role identification. As this task is a
necessary condition for credible role-play evaluation, the results highlight a core limitation
of LLM-as-a-judge methods. Full results are provided in Appendix D.
Nonetheless, some models show signs of progress. As shown in Table 1 placed in Ap-
pendix D, top-2 accuracy and mean rank suggest partial understanding: many models
rank the correct role second, suggesting they are still aware of the correct answer. Notably,


               100                                                                                             Human-Level
               90.8                                                                                                                 Current
                80                                                                                           68.8 Gap

Accuracy (%)
                             Non-reasoning Models
                                                                                    58.2 59.1 62.0 62.0 64.8
                60           Reasoning Models                        52.4 54.0 56.2
                                       40.9 41.4 41.7 43.4 45.3 48.8
                40      33.4 36.1 37.7
                20
                            bo ax B 4o till ini 3 ro B 2 B ta .1 .5 sh et 1 ro
                   3 .5 -turwen-m 2.5-32GPT- 1-dis -o3-mSeek-V-1.5-pn3-23K5 imi-KwQ-32k-3-beGPT-4 LM-42.5-fla.7-sonnSeek-Ri-2.5-p
                  - Q wen                                    o
               GPT                         ek-R PT eep uba we                 Q Gro             G ini- e-3 eep min
                             Q
                                    e e pSe G D Do Q                                          GemClau
                                                                                                       d D Ge
                                  D

Figure 3: Accuracy of LLMs on PersonaEval. Most LLMs struggle with role identification
compared to human, including the latest GLM-4.5, highlighting a fundamental limitation.
Reasoning models show clear advantages, suggesting that effective evaluation requires
deeper reasoning. DeepSeek-R1-distill refers to DeepSeek-R1-distill-Qwen-32B.


                                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025




Claude-3.7-sonnet, DeepSeek-R1, and Gemini-2.5-pro achieve near-perfect top-2 accuracy.
Furthermore, both ECE and Brier Score remain relatively low, indicating that models express
appropriate uncertainty rather than overconfident errors. Together, these results provide a
more optimistic view, suggesting that while LLM evaluators are not yet human-level, some
are catching up. With further advances, they may become viable for role-play evaluation.


4.2   Analysis on Reasoning Models

Reasoning models show clear advantages over base models in role identification. As shown
in Figure 3, Gemini-2.5-pro outperforms all foundation models, including Claude-3.7-sonnet.
We also compare reasoning models with and without native reasoning capabilities.
DeepSeek-R1-distill-Qwen-32B, which distills reasoning from DeepSeek-R1 into Qwen2.5,
achieves only a small gain over its base model. In contrast, QwQ-32B, trained via rein-
forcement learning on reasoning-intensive tasks, significantly outperforms Qwen2.5. This
suggests that shallow or distilled reasoning may not transfer well to role-play evaluation,
while end-to-end reasoning training is more effective.
These results support a broader insight: effective role identification requires robust, model-
native reasoning. Beyond pattern matching, evaluators must engage in contextual judgment
and logical inference—capabilities more aligned with human-like evaluation.
Our analysis suggests that several specific types of reasoning are particularly important for
effective role identification. These include:

      • Perspective-taking: The ability to infer the speaker’s background, goals, and point
        of view based on contextual clues within the dialogue.

      • Intent inference: The capacity to understand the underlying intention behind an
        utterance, which often goes beyond its surface-level semantic meaning.

      • Pragmatic reasoning: The skill of interpreting the social and contextual meanings
        of statements as they unfold within an interaction.

These cognitive skills allow an evaluator to move past simple linguistic pattern matching
and instead build a coherent model of the speaker’s identity, which is fundamental for
judging role-play fidelity in a human-aligned manner.


4.3   Case Study

Through case studies, we find that many examples, which are trivial for humans, are
frequently misinterpreted by LLMs. In these cases, models often follow the wrong trajectory
of reasoning. We suspect this is due to a fundamental difference in how role-play is
interpreted: LLMs tend to focus on surface-level linguistic cues such as speaking style,
while humans perform deeper reasoning. Specifically, humans excel at intent inference,
allowing them to prioritize the speaker’s communicative goals, and employ pragmatic
reasoning to understand the social context of the dialogue, abilities that current models still
lack. This observation echoes Josh Tenenbaum’s view that LLMs derive intelligence from
language, whereas humans develop language after acquiring intent-driven cognition.
We illustrate one such case below. The bracketed text denotes the character’s internal
thoughts. For a human reader, the reasoning path to identify the speaker is direct. First,
Harry’s internal monologue explicitly names ”Ron” as the subject of his concern (”Why
doesn’t Ron understand...”). Second, the respondent (Character2) directly addresses ”Harry”
in his reply. By integrating these two explicit references, the reader can unambiguously
conclude that Character2 is Ron Weasley. However, the advanced model fails to connect
these critical contextual signals, instead appearing to focus on the speaker’s tone and
linguistic style. Additional cases are provided in Appendix E.


                                              7
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025




    Dialogue and Candidate Roles                     Response from Gemini-2.5-pro-0605

    Character1: Harry Potter                         Analysis:
    [Thinking: Why doesn’t Ron under-                Hermione Granger is the most likely
    stand how important this is?]                    responder, as her cautious internal
    I want to know what he’s up to. And              thought, logical reasoning (“no rule
    don’t tell me it’s all in my head, not af-       saying...”), and balanced confrontation
    ter what I overheard between him and             (“You’re getting a bit obsessed...”) align
    Snape.                                           closely with her character profile.
    Character2: Unknown                              Ginny is a plausible second due to her
    [Thinking: I need to be careful here. I          confidence and perceptiveness. Ron is
    don’t want to dismiss Harry’s concerns,          less likely given the measured tone
    but this is getting out of hand.]                that doesn’t quite match his typically
    I never said it was all in your head, but        more reactive style. Harry is Charac-
    there’s no rule saying only one person           ter 1 being the one expressing obsession
    at a time can be plotting anything in            and therefore cannot be the responder.
    this place! You’re getting a bit obsessed
                                                     Final Answer:
    with Malfoy, Harry.
                                                     Hermione: 0.75, Ginny: 0.15, Ron: 0.10,
    Candidate Roles:                                 Harry: 0.00
    Hermione Granger, Ginny Weasley, Ron             (Higher probability indicates stronger
    Weasley (Correct), and Harry Potter              role correspondence.)



4.4    Human Study

To evaluate human performance on PersonaEval and compare it with LLMs, we conduct a
controlled study with 20 highly educated volunteers, including 10 undergraduates and 10
PhD students, selected to match the task’s reasoning and domain knowledge demands. Each
participant is given 50 examples sampled from cases where DeepSeek-R1 makes incorrect
high-confidence predictions, spanning all three tracks of the benchmark. No time limits are
imposed to allow for careful, thoughtful responses.
We deliberately select challenging cases for human evaluation to ensure meaningful com-
parisons on non-trivial instances. While this sampling introduces distributional differences,
it is actually a conservative choice that substantially strengthens our findings: if humans
still perform well on cases that are consistently difficult for models, the performance gap be-
comes even more compelling. We have manually verified that many cases in the benchmark
are straightforward for humans. If we had sampled uniformly across the full benchmark,
human accuracy would likely have been even higher.
As shown in Figure 3, participants achieve an average accuracy of 90.8%, far surpassing the
best-performing LLM. This highlights a substantial gap between current LLM capabilities
and human-level understanding in role identification. Full results are in Appendix F.


5     Improvement Investigation

To better understand what contributes to effective role-play evaluation, we investigate two
common strategies for improving LLMs: training-time adaptation and test-time compute.
At training time, we test whether injecting role-specific knowledge through fine-tuning
improves role identification performance (Section 5.1). At test time, we apply few-shot
prompting and self-consistency to examine whether additional inference-time computation
can enhance evaluator accuracy (Section 5.2). Detailed results can be found in Appendix G.

5.1    Training-time Adaptation

Many role-play studies fine-tune LLMs to inject role-specific knowledge, aiming to improve
downstream performance. In this section, we evaluate two generations of such models:


                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025




      (a) PersonaEval-Literary       (b) PersonaEval-Drama          (c) PersonaEval-Expertise

Figure 4: Accuracy of 4 models on the three tracks of PersonaEval, corresponding to (a), (b),
and (c), suggests that fine-tuning on role-specific data does not improve role identification
performance and may even degrade it, while improvements in base model capability show
more consistent gains. DBP is short for Doubao-pro. DBP-character and DBP-1.5-character
are fine-tuned from DBP and DBP-1.5 respectively using role-specific data.


Doubao-pro-character and Doubao-1.5-pro-character, which are obtained by fine-tuning
Doubao-pro and Doubao-1.5-pro, respectively.
These models are closed-source and provided by ByteDance5 . The training-time adaptation
is performed by fine-tuning on datasets enriched with role knowledge, identity recognition,
dialogue alignment, behavior alignment, and instruction tuning. These are implemented
under a broader System Prompt + SFT framework to ensure that models can maintain per-
sona consistency, recognize social roles, and infer identity throughout dialogue interactions.
In addition, the system also emphasizes multi-turn dialogue memory, context retention, and
user portrait construction to support long-term coherence.
As shown in Figure 4, fine-tuning on role knowledge does not improve performance on our
role identification task; in fact, it degrades it. A possible explanation is that memorizing
role-related patterns during fine-tuning may interfere with the model’s native reasoning
ability, which is essential for evaluating nuanced persona alignment. This suggests that
injecting role knowledge through training-time adaptation is not an effective way to build
reliable role-play evaluators. In contrast, comparing Doubao-pro and Doubao-1.5-pro shows
that improvements in the base model itself, such as general capability upgrades, have a
more positive impact on role identification performance.
We also test CoSER-Llama3.1-8B (Wang et al., 2025b), a fine-tuned model introduced in the
data source of PersonaEval-Literary. However, it fails to follow our benchmark instruc-
tions and cannot even produce usable outputs, making evaluation infeasible. This further
highlights that role-specific training alone is insufficient for constructing capable evaluators.

5.2    Test-time Compute

In this section, we evaluate two popular test-time compute strategies: few-shot prompt-
ing (Brown et al., 2020) and self-consistency (Wang et al., 2022). We focus on PersonaEval-
Literary using Qwen-max and DeepSeek-V3, as this track forms the core of PersonaEval
and offers more stable shot selection than others.
For few-shot prompting, we test 1-shot, 3-shot, and 5-shot settings. For self-consistency, we
apply majority voting with K = 3 and K = 5, as well as a weighted average. As shown in
Figure 5, few-shot prompting consistently improves model performance, but gains plateau
by 5-shot. In contrast, self-consistency provides negligible improvement across all settings.
   5 https://team.doubao.com/en



                                               9
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025




    (a) Test-time Compute on Qwen-max              (b) Test-time Compute on DeepSeek-V3

Figure 5: Accuracy on PersonaEval-Literary using two test-time compute strategies on (a)
Qwen-max and (b) DeepSeek-V3, respectively. The gray dashed line in each plot indicates
the 0-shot accuracy of the corresponding model. Few-shot prompting (1-shot, 3-shot, 5-shot)
shows consistent but saturated gains. In contrast, self-consistency (MV: majority vote, AVG:
weighted average) yields negligible improvement across settings.


These findings support our earlier analysis (Section 4.2): role-play evaluation relies more on
a model’s reasoning ability than on sampling or ensembling techniques. While few-shot
prompting can impart some reasoning patterns, its effect is constrained by the quality and
generalizability of exemplars. Self-consistency, meanwhile, merely reinforces a model’s
existing reasoning without extending it, yielding no meaningful performance boost.


6   Conclusion

In this work, we introduce PersonaEval, the first benchmark for evaluating whether LLMs
can reliably identify character roles from natural dialogue, a foundational step toward
human-aligned role-play evaluation. Our results show that current LLM evaluators perform
well below human-level, with even the strongest and latest models struggling on cases
that are trivial for humans. This highlights a core limitation in existing LLM-as-a-judge
pipelines. Through empirical analysis, we further find that training-time adaptation with
role-specific data offers little benefit, while test-time methods, especially reasoning models,
show more promise. These findings suggest that robust, context-aware reasoning, rather
than memorization, is essential for effective role-play evaluation, and point to test-time
compute as a practical and forward-looking direction.
Looking ahead, a promising line of future work is to move beyond output accuracy and in-
vestigate how LLM evaluators arrive at their predictions. This includes analyzing reasoning
trajectories across models, comparing them with human thought processes, and identifying
where their judgments diverge. To support this, new diagnostic tools may be developed
to visualize and interpret model reasoning paths. Such insights can inform new forms of
test-time guidance, such as human-aligned reasoning chains or rationale-based prompting.
Another direction is to explore how human-like reasoning strategies can be systematically
injected into models at inference time. Ultimately, closing the gap between LLM and human
evaluation may require bridging deeper cognitive differences—moving beyond pattern
recognition toward reasoning grounded in intent, context, and social understanding, much
like how human judgment emerges from experience before language, as emphasized by
Josh Tenenbaum. We hope PersonaEval serves as a step toward this goal.


Acknowledgments

This research is supported by the Key R&D Program of Shandong Province, China
(2023CXGC010214, 2024CXGC010213). We express our gratitude to the funding agency for
their support. We thank all the anonymous reviewers for their valuable suggestions.


                                              10
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025




References
Boson AI. Introducing rpbench-auto. https://boson.ai/rpbench-blog/, 2024. Ac-
  cessed: 2025-03-24.
Anthropic. Claude 3.7 sonnet, 2025. URL https://www.anthropic.com/claude/
 sonnet. Accessed: 2025-03-25.
Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang, Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan, Wenbin
   Ge, Yu Han, Fei Huang, et al. Qwen technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609,
   2023.
Xiao Bi, Deli Chen, Guanting Chen, Shanhuang Chen, Damai Dai, Chengqi Deng, Honghui
  Ding, Kai Dong, Qiushi Du, Zhe Fu, et al. Deepseek llm: Scaling open-source language
  models with longtermism. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02954, 2024.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla
  Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al.
  Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  33:1877–1901, 2020.
Jianlv Chen, Shitao Xiao, Peitian Zhang, Kun Luo, Defu Lian, and Zheng Liu. Bge
   m3-embedding: Multi-lingual, multi-functionality, multi-granularity text embeddings
   through self-knowledge distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03216, 2024.
Anoop Cherian, Kuan-Chuan Peng, Suhas Lohit, Joanna Matthiesen, Kevin Smith, and Josh
 Tenenbaum. Evaluating large vision-and-language models on children’s mathematical
 olympiads. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:15779–15800, 2024.
Steffi Chern, Ethan Chern, Graham Neubig, and Pengfei Liu. Can large language models be
  trusted for evaluation? scalable meta-evaluation of llms as evaluators via agent debate.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.16788, 2024.
Yanqi Dai, Huanran Hu, Lei Wang, Shengjie Jin, Xu Chen, and Zhiwu Lu. Mmrole: A
  comprehensive framework for developing and evaluating multimodal role-playing agents,
  2024.
Francisco Eiras, Eliott Zemour, Eric Lin, and Vaikkunth Mugunthan. Know thy judge: On
  the robustness meta-evaluation of llm safety judges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.04474, 2025.
Omid Ghasemi, Adam JL Harris, and Ben R Newell. From preference shifts to information
 leaks: Examining individuals’ sensitivity to information leakage in the framing effect.
 Cognition, 258:106087, 2025.
Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu,
 Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in
 llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.
Ilya Gusev. Pingpong: A benchmark for role-playing language models with user emulation
   and multi-model evaluation, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.06820.
Rishav Hada, Varun Gumma, Mohamed Ahmed, Kalika Bali, and Sunayana Sitaram. Metal:
  Towards multilingual meta-evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.01667, 2024.
Junru Lu, Jiazheng Li, Guodong Shen, Lin Gui, Siyu An, Yulan He, Di Yin, and Xing Sun.
  Rolemrc: A fine-grained composite benchmark for role-playing and instruction-following.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.11387, 2025.
Keming Lu, Bowen Yu, Chang Zhou, and Jingren Zhou. Large language models are
  superpositions of all characters: Attaining arbitrary role-play via self-alignment. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2401.12474, 2024.
Bhuvanashree Murugadoss, Christian Poelitz, Ian Drosos, Vu Le, Nick McKenna, Ca-
  rina Suzana Negreanu, Chris Parnin, and Advait Sarkar. Evaluating the evaluator:
  Measuring llms’ adherence to task evaluation instructions, 2024.


                                             11
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025




OpenAI. ChatGPT (3.5 Turbo Version) [Large Language Model]. https://chat.openai.
 com, 2023.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
OpenAI.       text-embedding-3-small.     https://openai.com/index/
 new-embedding-models-and-api-updates/, 2024. Accessed: 2025-03-23.
OpenAI. Gpt-4.1, 2025a. URL https://openai.com/index/gpt-4-1. Accessed: 2025-
 08-04.
OpenAI. Openai o3-mini. https://openai.com/index/openai-o3-mini/, 2025b.
 Accessed: 2025-03-26.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese
  bert-networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084, 2019.
Yunfan Shao, Linyang Li, Junqi Dai, and Xipeng Qiu. Character-LLM: A trainable agent
  for role-playing. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 13153–
  13187, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.814.
Guijin Son, Hyunwoo Ko, Hoyoung Lee, Yewon Kim, and Seunghyeok Hong. Llm-as-a-
 judge & reward model: What they can and cannot do, 2024a.
Guijin Son, Dongkeun Yoon, Juyoung Suk, Javier Aula-Blasco, Mano Aslan, Vu Trong Kim,
 Shayekh Bin Islam, Jaume Prats-Cristià, Lucı́a Tormo-Bañuelos, and Seungone Kim. Mm-
 eval: A multilingual meta-evaluation benchmark for llm-as-a-judge and reward models.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.17578, 2024b.
Gemini Team, Petko Georgiev, Ving Ian Lei, Ryan Burnell, Libin Bai, Anmol Gulati, Garrett
 Tanzer, Damien Vincent, Zhufeng Pan, Shibo Wang, et al. Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multi-
  modal understanding across millions of tokens of context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05530,
  2024.
Kimi Team, Yifan Bai, Yiping Bao, Guanduo Chen, Jiahao Chen, Ningxin Chen, Ruijue
  Chen, Yanru Chen, Yuankun Chen, Yutian Chen, Zhuofu Chen, Jialei Cui, Hao Ding,
  Mengnan Dong, Angang Du, Chenzhuang Du, Dikang Du, Yulun Du, Yu Fan, Yichen
  Feng, Kelin Fu, Bofei Gao, Hongcheng Gao, Peizhong Gao, Tong Gao, Xinran Gu, Longyu
  Guan, Haiqing Guo, Jianhang Guo, Hao Hu, Xiaoru Hao, Tianhong He, Weiran He,
  Wenyang He, Chao Hong, Yangyang Hu, Zhenxing Hu, Weixiao Huang, Zhiqi Huang,
  Zihao Huang, Tao Jiang, Zhejun Jiang, Xinyi Jin, Yongsheng Kang, Guokun Lai, Cheng
  Li, Fang Li, Haoyang Li, Ming Li, Wentao Li, Yanhao Li, Yiwei Li, Zhaowei Li, Zheming
  Li, Hongzhan Lin, Xiaohan Lin, Zongyu Lin, Chengyin Liu, Chenyu Liu, Hongzhang
  Liu, Jingyuan Liu, Junqi Liu, Liang Liu, Shaowei Liu, T. Y. Liu, Tianwei Liu, Weizhou
  Liu, Yangyang Liu, Yibo Liu, Yiping Liu, Yue Liu, Zhengying Liu, Enzhe Lu, Lijun Lu,
  Shengling Ma, Xinyu Ma, Yingwei Ma, Shaoguang Mao, Jie Mei, Xin Men, Yibo Miao,
  Siyuan Pan, Yebo Peng, Ruoyu Qin, Bowen Qu, Zeyu Shang, Lidong Shi, Shengyuan
  Shi, Feifan Song, Jianlin Su, Zhengyuan Su, Xinjie Sun, Flood Sung, Heyi Tang, Jiawen
  Tao, Qifeng Teng, Chensi Wang, Dinglu Wang, Feng Wang, Haiming Wang, Jianzhou
  Wang, Jiaxing Wang, Jinhong Wang, Shengjie Wang, Shuyi Wang, Yao Wang, Yejie Wang,
  Yiqin Wang, Yuxin Wang, Yuzhi Wang, Zhaoji Wang, Zhengtao Wang, Zhexu Wang, Chu
  Wei, Qianqian Wei, Wenhao Wu, Xingzhe Wu, Yuxin Wu, Chenjun Xiao, Xiaotong Xie,
  Weimin Xiong, Boyu Xu, Jing Xu, Jinjing Xu, L. H. Xu, Lin Xu, Suting Xu, Weixin Xu,
  Xinran Xu, Yangchuan Xu, Ziyao Xu, Junjie Yan, Yuzi Yan, Xiaofei Yang, Ying Yang, Zhen
  Yang, Zhilin Yang, Zonghan Yang, Haotian Yao, Xingcheng Yao, Wenjie Ye, Zhuorui Ye,
  Bohong Yin, Longhui Yu, Enming Yuan, Hongbang Yuan, Mengjie Yuan, Haobing Zhan,
  Dehao Zhang, Hao Zhang, Wanlu Zhang, Xiaobin Zhang, Yangkun Zhang, Yizhi Zhang,
  Yongting Zhang, Yu Zhang, Yutao Zhang, Yutong Zhang, Zheng Zhang, Haotian Zhao,
  Yikai Zhao, Huabin Zheng, Shaojie Zheng, Jianren Zhou, Xinyu Zhou, Zaida Zhou, Zhen
  Zhu, Weiyu Zhuang, and Xinxing Zu. Kimi k2: Open agentic intelligence, 2025. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.20534.


                                            12
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025




Qwen Team. Qwen3 technical report, 2025a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.
 09388.
Qwen Team. Qwq-32b: Embracing the power of reinforcement learning, March 2025b. URL
 https://qwenlm.github.io/blog/qwq-32b/.
Quan Tu, Shilong Fan, Zihang Tian, and Rui Yan. Charactereval: A chinese benchmark for
 role-playing conversational agent evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01275, 2024.
Jiaan Wang, Yunlong Liang, Fandong Meng, Zengkui Sun, Haoxiang Shi, Zhixu Li, Jinan
   Xu, Jianfeng Qu, and Jie Zhou. Is ChatGPT a good NLG evaluator? a preliminary study.
   In Yue Dong, Wen Xiao, Lu Wang, Fei Liu, and Giuseppe Carenini (eds.), Proceedings of
   the 4th New Frontiers in Summarization Workshop, pp. 1–11, Singapore, December 2023.
   Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.newsum-1.1.
Noah Wang, Z.y. Peng, Haoran Que, Jiaheng Liu, Wangchunshu Zhou, Yuhan Wu,
 Hongcheng Guo, Ruitong Gan, Zehao Ni, Jian Yang, Man Zhang, Zhaoxiang Zhang,
 Wanli Ouyang, Ke Xu, Wenhao Huang, Jie Fu, and Junran Peng. RoleLLM: Benchmarking,
 eliciting, and enhancing role-playing abilities of large language models. In Lun-Wei Ku,
 Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational
 Linguistics ACL 2024, pp. 14743–14777, Bangkok, Thailand and virtual meeting, August
 2024a. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ruiqi Wang, Jiyu Guo, Cuiyun Gao, Guodong Fan, Chun Yong Chong, and Xin Xia. Can llms
  replace human evaluators? an empirical study of llm-as-a-judge in software engineering.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.06193, 2025a.
Xi Wang, Hongliang Dai, Shen Gao, and Piji Li. Characteristic ai agents via large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12368, 2024b.
Xintao Wang, Yunze Xiao, Jen-tse Huang, Siyu Yuan, Rui Xu, Haoran Guo, Quan Tu, Yaying
  Fei, Ziang Leng, Wei Wang, Jiangjie Chen, Cheng Li, and Yanghua Xiao. InCharacter:
  Evaluating personality fidelity in role-playing agents through psychological interviews.
  In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1840–
  1873, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024c. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.102.
Xintao Wang, Heng Wang, Yifei Zhang, Xinfeng Yuan, Rui Xu, Jen-tse Huang, Siyu Yuan,
  Haoran Guo, Jiangjie Chen, Wei Wang, et al. Coser: Coordinating llm-based persona
  simulation of established roles. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.09082, 2025b.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
  Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171, 2022.
Hui Wei, Shenghua He, Tian Xia, Andy Wong, Jingyang Lin, and Mei Han. Systematic
 evaluation of llm-as-a-judge in llm alignment tasks: Explainable metrics and diverse
 prompt templates, 2024.
Bowen Wu, Kaili Sun, Ziwei Bai, Ying Li, and Baoxun Wang. Raiden benchmark: Evaluat-
  ing role-playing conversational agents with measurement-driven custom dialogues. In
  Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics, pp. 11086–11106,
  2025.
xAI. Grok 3 beta, 2025. URL https://x.ai/news/grok-3. Accessed: 2025-08-04.
An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan
 Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei
 Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu, Keqin
 Bao, Kexin Yang, Le Yu, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Pei Zhang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Runji Lin,
 Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang, Tingyu Xia, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su,
 Yichang Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, and Zihan Qiu. Qwen2.5
 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15115, 2024.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025




Tao Yang, Yuhua Zhu, Xiaojun Quan, Cong Liu, and Qifan Wang. Psyplay: Personality-
  infused role-playing conversational agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.03821, 2025.
Xiaoyan Yu, Tongxu Luo, Yifan Wei, Fangyu Lei, Yiming Huang, Peng Hao, and Liehuang
  Zhu. Neeko: Leveraging dynamic lora for efficient multi-character role-playing agent.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.13717, 2024.
Xinfeng Yuan, Siyu Yuan, Yuhan Cui, Tianhe Lin, Xintao Wang, Rui Xu, Jiangjie Chen, and
  Deqing Yang. Evaluating character understanding of large language models via character
  profiling from fictional works. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12726, 2024.
Z.AI. Glm-4.5, 2025. URL https://z.ai/blog/glm-4.5. Accessed: 2025-08-04.
Wenbo Zhang, Zihang Xu, and Hengrui Cai. Defining boundaries: A spectrum of task
 feasibility for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.05873, 2024.
Yulai Zhao, Haolin Liu, Dian Yu, SY Kung, Haitao Mi, and Dong Yu. One token to fool
  llm-as-a-judge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.08794, 2025.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao
  Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with
  mt-bench and chatbot arena. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:46595–
  46623, 2023.
Jinfeng Zhou, Zhuang Chen, Dazhen Wan, Bosi Wen, Yi Song, Jifan Yu, Yongkang Huang,
   Libiao Peng, Jiaming Yang, Xiyao Xiao, et al. Characterglm: Customizing chinese con-
   versational ai characters with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16832,
   2023.
Jinfeng Zhou, Yongkang Huang, Bosi Wen, Guanqun Bi, Yuxuan Chen, Pei Ke, Zhuang
   Chen, Xiyao Xiao, Libiao Peng, Kuntian Tang, et al. Characterbench: Benchmarking
   character customization of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.11912, 2024a.
Ruiyang Zhou, Lu Chen, and Kai Yu. Is llm a reliable reviewer? a comprehensive evaluation
  of llm on automatic paper reviewing tasks. In Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International
  Conference on Computational Linguistics, Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING
  2024), pp. 9340–9351, 2024b.




                                            14
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025




A   Prompt to LLM Evaluators



                    An Example Prompt for Evaluating LLMs in PersonaEval

 You are an AI specialist tasked with dialogue role recognition. Please analyze the following
 conversation and determine the likelihood of four character candidates being the responder.
 # Conversation
 [Character1: Harry Potter]
 [Begin]
 [Why doesn’t Ron understand how important this is?] (frustrated) I want to know what he’s up
 to. And don’t tell me it’s all in my head, not after what I overheard between him and Snape.
 [End]
 [Character2]
 [Begin]
 [I need to be careful here. I don’t want to dismiss Harry’s concerns, but this is getting out of
 hand.] I never said it was all in your head, but there’s no rule saying only one person at a time
 can be plotting anything in this place! You’re getting a bit obsessed with Malfoy, Harry.
 [End]
 # Task
 Your task is to analyze the response of Character2 and estimate the Bayesian probability distribu-
 tion for each of the four character candidates. The probabilities should reflect the likelihood of
 each candidate being the one responding, based on their profiles. The sum of all probabilities
 must equal 1. A higher probability for a candidate indicates that the response aligns better with
 that candidate.
 # Character Candidates
 1. Ginny Weasley
 Ginny Weasley, the youngest child and only daughter of the Weasley family, emerges as a pivotal
 character in “Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince.” With her fiery red hair and strong-willed
 personality, Ginny has grown from Ron’s shy little sister into a confident and capable young
 witch. She possesses a quick wit and a mischievous streak, often using humor to diffuse tense
 situations...
 2. Ron Weasley
 Ron Weasley, Harry Potter’s loyal best friend and steadfast companion, plays a crucial role in
 the final installment of the Harry Potter series. With his trademark red hair and freckles, Ron
 embodies the heart and humor of the trio. Coming from a large, loving wizarding family, Ron’s
 background provides both strength and insecurity as he faces the challenges ahead...
 3. Hermione Granger
 Hermione Granger, in “Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows”, emerges as a brilliant, resourceful,
 and fiercely loyal young witch. As one of Harry Potter’s closest friends and allies, she plays a
 crucial role in the quest to defeat Lord Voldemort. Hermione’s exceptional intelligence and vast
 magical knowledge make her an invaluable asset to the trio’s mission...
 4. Harry Potter
 Harry Potter, the protagonist of “Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince,” is a sixteen-year-
 old wizard entering his sixth year at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. With his
 distinctive lightning bolt scar and round glasses, Harry continues to bear the weight of being
 “The Chosen One” in the fight against Lord Voldemort...
 # Response Format
 Analyze step by step, and then output the following JSON object containing the final probability
 distribution. Ensure that the sum of all probabilities equals 1, with each probability representing
 the likelihood that a given candidate is the responder. Do not modify the character names, and
 use the full character names exactly as they appear in the task.
      ‘‘‘json
      {
         "Ginny Weasley": probability_for_Ginny Weasley,
         "Ron Weasley": probability_for_Ron Weasley,
         "Hermione Granger": probability_for_Hermione Granger,
         "Harry Potter": probability_for_Harry Potter,
      }
      ‘‘‘




                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025




B    Discussion of Confidence-Based Filering
Our choice of an automated, single-model filtering strategy is motivated by the large scale
of the dataset, which makes manual annotation or more complex multi-model validation
schemes impractical within the scope of this work. The unfiltered data include numerous
trivial cases (e.g., direct name mentions, simple greetings) that do not genuinely test role
inference. Thus, a curation process is essential to ensure the benchmark’s focus on reasoning.
We recognize the potential for this method to introduce systematic bias. The resulting dataset
is most reliably considered a collection of hard cases for models of the Qwen family or those
with similar capabilities. Importantly, we do not directly select cases where Qwen fails, but
rather use a confidence threshold (less than 0.5 for the correct answer) to identify uncertain
cases, reducing overfitting the filter to any particular model. However, our primary objective
in this paper is to uncover and demonstrate an overlooked reasoning problem in LLMs. The
curated dataset, by successfully challenging even a powerful model like Qwen-max, serves
this purpose effectively and provides strong support for our main claims. We believe this
benchmark, despite its limitations, is a valuable first step. For future applications aiming for
a more generalized benchmark, we recommend adopting a cross-validation approach using
a diverse suite of models to further enhance robustness and utility.

C    Versions of LLMs Used in the Paper
All LLMs with its repective version is as follows:

      • GPT-3.5-turbo (OpenAI, 2023): gpt-3.5-turbo-0125
      • GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2023): gpt-4o-2024-08-06
      • GPT-4.1 (OpenAI, 2025a): gpt-4.1-2025-04-14
      • GPT-o3-mini (OpenAI, 2025b): o3-mini-2025-01-31
      • Qwen-max (Bai et al., 2023): qwen-max-2025-01-25
      • Qwen3-235B (Team, 2025a): Qwen3-235B-a22B, non-thinking version
      • Doubao-1.5-pro6 : doubao-1-5-pro-32k-250115
      • DeepSeek-V3 (Bi et al., 2024): DeepSeek-V3-250324
      • DeepSeek-R1 (Guo et al., 2025): DeepSeek-R1-0120
      • Gemini-2.5-pro (Team et al., 2024): Gemini-2.5-pro-preview-03-25

Other models, including Claude-3.7-sonnet (Anthropic, 2025), Qwen2.5-32B (Yang et al.,
2024), QwQ-32B (Team, 2025b), DeepSeek-R1-distill-Qwen-32b (Guo et al., 2025), Kimi-K2-
Instruct (Team et al., 2025), GLM-4.5 (Z.AI, 2025), Grok-3-beta (xAI, 2025), and Gemini-2.5-
flash (Team et al., 2024), so far there’s only one version.

D     Detailed Experiment Results of PersonaEval
We report the detailed experiment results of PersonaEval here, including top-1 accuracy, top-
2 accuracy, mean rank (MR) of the ground truth role in responses, Expected Calibration Error
(ECE), and Brier Score (BS). Except mean rank, others are shown in percentage. DeepSeek-
R1-distill refers to DeepSeek-R1-distill-Qwen-32B. The best performance in each column is
marked in bold.
We display the metrics summarized on the whole benchmark first in Table 1, and then the
results on the three track are shown respectively. We also compare the two versions of
DeepSeek-V3, indicating that the capability gap of role-play LLM evaluators are narrowing.
Performance across models appears strongly correlated with the model capability. For
instance, GPT-3.5-turbo consistently underperforms relative to more advanced models,
    6 https://team.doubao.com/en



                                              16
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025




while Claude-3.7-sonnet demonstrates significantly superior performance. These results
align with expectations, reaffirming the importance of model quality in evaluator tasks.
Furthermore, model specialization plays a notable role. For example, GPT-4o demon-
strates competitive performance in PersonaEval-Expertise, on par with Claude-3.7-sonnet,
while DeepSeek-V3 performs particularly well on benchmarks targeting Chinese-language
tasks. These observations suggest that role-play evaluator competence is not only model-
dependent but also domain-specific.

              Model           Top-1 Acc ↑    Top-2 Acc ↑    MR ↓     ECE ↓      BS ↓
          GPT-3.5-turbo           33.4           71.6        2.02     21.1      19.5
           Qwen-max               36.1           77.7        1.92     28.7      20.8
          Qwen2.5-32B             37.7           77.7        1.89     23.5      19.1
             GPT-4o               40.9           83.2        1.75     16.0      16.7
       DeepSeek-R1-distill        41.4           75.0        1.92     22.6      19.2
          GPT-o3-mini             41.7           76.3        1.88     23.4      18.5
       DeepSeek-V3-241226         38.2           81.0        1.80     24.4      18.7
       DeepSeek-V3-250324         43.4           84.2        1.73     22.8      17.8
         Doubao-1.5-pro           45.3           82.0        1.72     21.1      17.3
          Qwen3-235B              48.8           84.8        1.70     20.3      16.6
            Kimi-K2               52.4           86.9        1.60     26.6      16.8
            QwQ-32B               54.0           83.8        1.67     22.3      16.4
           Grok-3-beta            56.2           91.0        1.50      4.4      12.7
             GPT-4.1              58.2           91.3        1.47     11.9      12.4
            GLM-4.5               59.1           87.6        1.54      9.7      13.7
         Gemini-2.5-flash         62.0           89.9        1.46     11.9      12.6
        Claude-3.7-sonnet         62.0           91.2        1.46      8.3      12.1
          DeepSeek-R1             64.8           90.0        1.48     14.9      13.2
         Gemini-2.5-pro           68.8           92.6        1.38      4.9      10.5

            Table 1: Complete results across all three tracks of PersonaEval.


              Model           Top-1 Acc ↑    Top-2 Acc ↑    MR ↓     ECE ↓      BS ↓
          GPT-3.5-turbo           33.5           70.9        2.06     21.3      19.5
           Qwen-max               35.9           76.3        1.98     29.2      21.0
          Qwen2.5-32B             38.0           75.7        1.96     23.7      19.2
             GPT-4o               41.3           83.7        1.79     16.0      16.6
       DeepSeek-R1-distill        41.8           72.9        1.98     23.0      19.2
          GPT-o3-mini             42.5           76.9        1.88     22.9      18.4
       DeepSeek-V3-241226         38.0           79.5        1.90     24.6      18.7
       DeepSeek-V3-250324         43.3           83.5        1.78     22.9      17.8
         Doubao-1.5-pro           44.9           79.1        1.84     21.6      17.5
          Qwen3-235B              49.5           86.0        1.67     20.0      16.5
            Kimi-K2               53.0           88.1        1.59     26.5      16.7
            QwQ-32B               54.3           82.1        1.71     23.0      16.5
           Grok-3-Beta            57.1           92.3        1.47      4.0      12.4
             GPT-4.1              59.6           93.1        1.44     11.1      12.1
            GLM-4.5               60.9           89.5        1.51     10.1      13.5
         Gemini-2.5-flash         62.5           91.0        1.45     11.9      12.5
        Claude-3.7-sonnet         63.0           91.8        1.48      8.0      11.8
          DeepSeek-R1             65.4           89.4        1.49     14.7      13.1
         Gemini-2.5-pro           69.5           93.3        1.37      5.4      10.3

                  Table 2: Complete results on PersonaEval-Literary.




                                            17
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025




             Model           Top-1 Acc ↑    Top-2 Acc ↑   MR ↓   ECE ↓     BS ↓
         GPT-3.5-turbo           26.3           57.8      2.33      26.1   21.8
          Qwen-max               31.6           66.9      2.16      33.4   22.5
         Qwen2.5-32B             30.0           61.9      2.24      29.6   21.6
            GPT-4o               28.3           61.3      2.24      26.1   20.9
      DeepSeek-R1-distill        30.1           61.5      2.24      26.8   21.3
         GPT-o3-mini             35.0           63.9      2.14      30.7   21.0
      DeepSeek-V3-241226         34.7           63.5      2.19      30.3   21.8
      DeepSeek-V3-250324         42.2           71.4      1.98      30.0   20.2
        Doubao-1.5-pro           47.6           75.3      1.85      22.6   17.4
         Qwen3-235B              38.7           72.1      1.97      29.0   19.9
           Kimi-K2               47.8           78.8      1.78      33.3   19.7
           QwQ-32B               48.0           76.6      1.82      19.3   16.8
          Grok-3-Beta            46.9           78.6      1.80      16.3   16.6
            GPT-4.1              45.4           76.3      1.84      23.5   17.5
           GLM-4.5               47.2           78.5      1.80      17.9   16.6
        Gemini-2.5-flash         56.7           81.1      1.67      20.5   15.6
       Claude-3.7-sonnet         50.2           77.0      1.80      18.6   16.7
         DeepSeek-R1             56.3           84.1      1.64      22.4   15.8
        Gemini-2.5-pro           60.3           85.8      1.57      13.1   13.4

                  Table 3: Complete results on PersonaEval-Drama.




             Model           Top-1 Acc ↑    Top-2 Acc ↑   MR ↓   ECE ↓     BS ↓
         GPT-3.5-turbo           45.1           69.8      2.05      10.0   14.2
          Qwen-max               51.5           77.3      1.85       6.0   12.6
         Qwen2.5-32B             47.6           73.1      1.99      6.7    13.2
            GPT-4o               56.7           78.5      1.79       9.1   12.0
      DeepSeek-R1-distill        50.5           73.4      1.96      7.7    13.4
         GPT-o3-mini             29.8           53.8      2.41      23.5   16.9
      DeepSeek-V3-241226         50.8           73.8      1.92       7.9   13.0
      DeepSeek-V3-250324         51.6           74.1      1.93       3.6   12.8
        Doubao-1.5-pro           57.2           82.0      1.74      10.2   12.0
         Qwen3-235B              47.2           67.7      2.08      10.4   14.1
           Kimi-K2               39.6           60.8      1.76      14.8   13.6
           QwQ-32B               57.2           77.5      1.84       4.2   12.2
          Grok-3-beta            43.2           69.2      2.04       8.5   13.5
            GPT-4.1              34.7           56.3      1.87      13.1   14.0
           GLM-4.5               44.4           62.3      1.69       8.9   12.5
        Gemini-2.5-flash         55.3           69.8      1.40      12.7   10.2
       Claude-3.7-sonnet         53.8           74.8      1.86       9.6   12.0
         DeepSeek-R1             60.9           80.7      1.70       5.9   10.9
        Gemini-2.5-pro           62.1           84.4      1.62      12.1   11.0

                 Table 4: Complete results on PersonaEval-Expertise.




                                           18
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025




E     Thorough Case Study

We present several cases in which competent LLMs make high-confidence errors, while
the task remains relatively straightforward for humans. The bracketed text denotes the
character’s internal thoughts.

E.1    Case 1: Proper Addressing

This case is from Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire (Harry Potter, #4). It involves character
addressing, which requires some thought from humans but is relatively straightforward.
LLMs, however, are easily misled by the “Weasley” clue and perform extensive, unnecessary
analysis in the wrong direction.

Proper Analysis: Character2 cannot be Hermione Granger (option 4), as she is already
speaking as Character1. Severus Snape (option 3) would never refer to Mr. Weasley in such
a casual or thoughtful way, nor would he show curiosity about dramatic student entrances.
Ron Weasley (option 1) is also unlikely to be Character2, because he would not refer to
his own father as “Mr. Weasley”—he would say “Dad”. This detail strongly suggests that
Character2 is Harry Potter (option 2), who often refers to Ron’s father as “Mr. Weasley” and
was present at the Quidditch World Cup to hear that quote firsthand. The tone—thoughtful
and slightly amused—also fits Harry, who frequently reflects on past conversations and
tries to make sense of unusual magical situations. Therefore, Harry is the most fitting choice
for Character2.
    Dialogue and Candidate Roles                     Response from Claude-3.7-sonnet

    Character1: Hermione Granger                     Analysis:
    [Thinking: I’m getting a bit frustrated          The response most likely comes from
    having to repeat this information.]              Ron Weasley, who naturally quotes
    You can’t Apparate inside the Hogwarts           his father, attended the World Cup,
    grounds, how often do I have to tell             and speaks in a casual, speculative
    you?                                             tone. Harry Potter is a secondary
    Character2: Unknown                              possibility, having attended the World
    [Thinking: I remember what Mr.                   Cup, but lacks Ron’s personal con-
    Weasley said about wizards showing off.          nection and typical commentary style.
    Maybe that’s what they’ll do.]                   Severus Snape is highly unlikely, as
    Maybe the foreign students are prepar-           the tone, content, and familiarity with
    ing a dramatic entrance... Remember              Mr. Weasley don’t match his character.
    what Mr. Weasley said at the World               Hermione Granger is explicitly Charac-
    Cup? ’Always the same — we can’t re-             ter1 and speaks differently, making her
    sist showing off when we get together...’        an impossible fit.
    Candidate Roles:                                 Final Answer:
    Ron Weasley, Harry Potter (Correct),             Ron: 0.85, Harry: 0.15, Snape: 0.00,
    Severus Snape, and Hermione Granger              Hermione: 0.00


E.2    Case 2: Character Traits

This case is from The Adventures of Tom Sawyer. It requires comparing key characteristics
of the candidate characters and selecting the most appropriate one. For humans, as long
as they are familiar with the rough traits of the options, making the correct choice is not
difficult. However, LLMs often become overly focused on character profiles and plot details,
leading to unnecessary complexity in their reasoning.

Proper Analysis: Character2 cannot be Aunt Polly (option 1), as she is an adult and
wouldn’t be involved in a secretive moral dilemma with Huck in this context—especially
not discussing running away or saving Muff Potter. Sid (option 3), Tom’s well-behaved
and rather tattletale-like cousin, lacks the courage and internal conflict shown here; he’s


                                                19
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025




unlikely to risk trouble to help someone like Muff Potter. Huckleberry Finn (option 2) is
already speaking as Character1, so he cannot also be Character2. That leaves Tom Sawyer
(option 4), who fits perfectly. The line reflects Tom’s classic internal struggle between fear of
consequences and his growing sense of justice—a major theme in The Adventures of Tom
Sawyer. Tom is the one who knows Muff Potter is innocent and eventually risks his safety
to reveal the truth, making him the clear match for Character2.

  Dialogue and Candidate Roles                       Response from GPT-4o

  Character1: Huckleberry Finn                       Analysis:
  [Thinking: I try to think of a way out of          The response reflects fear and moral re-
  this mess.]                                        sponsibility, best matching Huckleberry
  Maybe we ought to leave town, Tom.                 Finn, who witnessed the event and cares
  Just light out and never come back.                deeply about justice. Tom Sawyer also
  Character2: Unknown                                fits, given his eventual decision to de-
  [Thinking: I’m torn between fear and a             fend Muff Potter. Aunt Polly is un-
  sense of responsibility.]                          likely, since she stays removed from
  But what about Muff Potter? He didn’t              such events, and Sid lacks both the in-
  do nothing, and he’s gonna hang for it             volvement and moral weight needed for
  if we don’t say something.                         this response.
  Candidate Roles:                                   Final Answer:
  Aunt Polly, Huckleberry Finn, Sid, and             Polly: 0.05, Huckleberry: 0.60, Sid: 0.05,
  Tom Sawyer (Correct)                               Sawyer: 0.30


E.3   Case 3: Irrelevant Characters

This case is from The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn. In this case, identifying the irrelevant op-
tions based on the dialogue is sufficient to make the correct choice quickly, without needing
to analyze expressive details. This makes the task relatively simple for humans. How-
ever, LLMs tend to focus on language style and plot, overlooking the simplest relationship
between the characters in the dialogue.

Proper Analysis: Character2 cannot be Huck Finn (option 1) or Huckleberry Finn (option
3), as he is already speaking as Character1. The use of “we” and the contrast in their tones
show that two distinct characters are involved. Uncle Tom (option 2) is not a character
in The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn—he belongs to a completely different novel (Uncle
Tom’s Cabin by Harriet Beecher Stowe)—so he can be ruled out entirely. That leaves Tom
Sawyer (option 4), which fits perfectly. Tom is known for his elaborate, imaginative plans,
even when they’re impractical or dangerous—like digging Jim out with a case-knife. In
this passage, he’s beginning to compromise slightly due to the urgency of the situation,
but still clings to the idea of a “proper” escape. His language, full of roundabout logic and
excitement about the adventure, is classic Tom Sawyer.

  Dialogue and Candidate Roles                       Response from DeepSeek-V3

  Character1: Huckleberry Finn                       Analysis:
  [Thinking: I can’t believe we’re really go-        The response shows pragmatic and
  ing to do this.]                                   strategic thinking, which aligns closely
  All right—I don’t care where he comes              with Huckleberry Finn’s practical mind-
  out, so he comes out; and Jim don’t, ei-           set. The informal dialect (“resk” instead
  ther, I reckon. But there’s one thing, any-        of “risk”) and collaborative tone further
  way—Jim’s too old to be dug out with a             support this match. Tom Sawyer, by con-
  case-knife. He won’t last.                         trast, tends to propose elaborate, roman-
  Character2: Unknown                                ticized plans based on adventure nov-
  [Thinking: We need to stick to the plan,           els, which doesn’t match the straight-
  but maybe we can compromise a little.]             forward, cautious tone of this response.



                                                20
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025




  Well, we can’t resk being as long as we          Uncle Tom, from a completely different
  ought to, because it mayn’t take very            novel (Uncle Tom’s Cabin), lacks any
  long for Uncle Silas to hear from down           connection to the context, characters, or
  there by New Orleans. He’ll hear Jim             dialect here. Since “Huck Finn” and
  ain’t from there. Then his next move will        “Huckleberry Finn” are duplicate entries
  be to advertise Jim, or something like           for the same character, the high likeli-
  that. So we can’t resk being as long dig-        hood is split between them unless they
  ging him out as we ought to.                     are merged.
  Candidate Roles:                                 Final Answer:
  Huck Finn, Uncle Tom, Huckleberry                Huck: 0.50, Uncle: 0.00, Huckleberry:
  Finn, and Tom Sawyer (Correct)                   0.50, Sawyer: 0.00




E.4   Case 4: Tone and Complex Plot Inference

This case is from A Storm of Swords (A Song of Ice and Fire, #3). It is more challenging,
primarily due to the domain knowledge required. However, with a general understanding
of the plot of the book, humans can make the correct choice through reasoning and analysis.
For LLMs, this case requires identifying the right direction and careful reasoning. However,
LLMs often follow incorrect reasoning paths and prematurely conclude an incorrect answer
based solely on the “Kingslayer” clue.



Proper Analysis: Character2 cannot be Tywin Lannister (options 1 and 4), as Tywin is
known for his stern, authoritative demeanor and would never speak with such sarcasm
or self-deprecation—especially not about being a kinslayer or kingslayer. Jaime Lannister
(option 2) is famously the “kingslayer” (mentioned in the profile), but he has never been to
Castle Black, which makes the reference to its residents inconsistent with his experiences.
The tone of the dialogue—marked by cynicism, dark humor, and a strained relationship
with Tywin—strongly suggests Tyrion Lannister (option 3). Tyrion did visit Castle Black,
and often uses biting wit. These factors make him the only fitting choice for Character2.

  Dialogue and Candidate Roles                     Response from QwQ-32B

  Character1: Kevan Lannister                      Analysis:
  [Thinking: I need to distance Tywin              The dialogue is sarcastic, self-
  from Ned Stark’s fate.]                          aware, and steeped in personal
  Your father had no part in that.                 history—marked by references to
  Character2: Unknown                              Castle Black, being a “kinslayer and
  [Thinking: I can’t believe they think I’m        kingslayer”, and mocking the idea that
  this naive.]                                     Tywin Lannister would forgive such
  Castle Black teems with murderers,               crimes. These clues unmistakably point
  thieves and rapists, but I don’t recall          to Jaime Lannister, famously known as
  meeting many regicides while I was               the Kingslayer, speaking in his signa-
  there. You expect me to believe that             ture bitter tone. The speaker’s father
  if I admit to being a kinslayer and              is Tywin, eliminating both Tywin and
  kingslayer, my father will simply nod,           Lord Tywin (duplicates) as possibilities,
  forgive me, and pack me off to the Wall          and Tyrion is neither a kingslayer nor
  with some warm woolen smallclothes.              known to describe himself this way.
  (hoots rudely)                                   The dialect, references, and tone make
                                                   Jaime the only plausible match.
  Candidate Roles:
  Tywin Lannister (Correct), Jaime Lannis-         Final Answer:
  ter, Tyrion Lannister, and Lord Tywin            Tywin: 0.00, Jaime: 1.00, Tyrion: 0.00,
  Lannister                                        Lord: 0.00


                                              21
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025




F   Results of Human Study

We divide the 50 questions into three parts according to the sample distribution across the
three tracks: 45 questions from PersonaEval-Literary, 3 from PersonaEval-Drama, and 2
from PersonaEval-Expertise. Each participant is asked to select what they believe to be the
correct answer, similar to a multiple-choice task. If any language barriers arise, participants
are permitted to use translation tools without generative capabilities like LLMs. We report
the number of correct answers and the accuracy for each participant per track, as shown in
Table 5. Due to privacy concerns, we represent each participant using a number rather than
their personal information. Most participants achieved an accuracy of 90%, and the overall
accuracy for all 20 participants is 90.8%.

    Parti.   Lit.   Drama    Exp.    Acc. (%)        Parti.     Lit.   Drama   Exp.    Acc. (%)
    No.01    43       2        2        94           No.11       45      2      2        98
    No.02    44       1        1        92           No.12       40      2      1        86
    No.03    41       1        2        88           No.13       42      2      2        92
    No.04    39       3        1        86           No.14       43      2      2        94
    No.05    42       1        2        90           No.15       42      2      2        92
    No.06    43       2        2        94           No.16       42      3      2        94
    No.07    41       2        1        88           No.17       44      0      2        92
    No.08    42       2        2        92           No.18       42      2      1        90
    No.09    42       1        2        90           No.19       38      1      2        82
    No.10    41       3        2        92           No.20       41      2      2        90

Table 5: Results of Human Study, with numbers indicating the number of correct answers
for each participant.


G    Comprehensive Retults of Training-time adaptation and Test-time
     Compute

We display the complete results of Section 5.1 and Section 5.2 here, with the same metris in
Appendix D. Table 6, Table 7, and Table 8 show the full results of train-time experiments on
the three tracks. For test-time compute, we present the results of few-shot prompting here,
because self-consistency lose the information of confidence.

                Model               Top-1 Acc ↑       Top-2 Acc ↑       MR ↓   ECE ↓    BS ↓
          Doubao-pro                   41.8                   79.2      1.86    18.5     18.0
      Doubao-pro-character             37.1                   69.0      2.07    25.7     20.6
        Doubao-1.5-pro                 44.9                   79.1      1.84    21.6     17.5
     Doubao-1.5-pro-character          38.7                   77.8      1.90    11.1     17.1

    Table 6: Comprehensive results of train-time adaptation on PersonaEval-Literary.


                Model               Top-1 Acc ↑       Top-2 Acc ↑       MR ↓   ECE ↓    BS ↓
          Doubao-pro                   43.8                   70.0      1.97    25.1     19.3
      Doubao-pro-character             28.0                   58.0      2.32    37.5     23.9
        Doubao-1.5-pro                 47.6                   75.3      1.85    22.6     17.4
     Doubao-1.5-pro-character          34.1                   66.8      2.12    20.6     19.2

    Table 7: Comprehensive results of train-time adaptation on PersonaEval-Drama.




                                                22
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025




             Model             Top-1 Acc ↑     Top-2 Acc ↑     MR ↓      ECE ↓     BS ↓
         Doubao-pro                50.6           77.1          1.90      12.7      13.1
     Doubao-pro-character          37.5           63.9          2.32      12.7      15.5
       Doubao-1.5-pro              57.2           82.0          1.74      10.2      12.0
    Doubao-1.5-pro-character       54.8           78.8          1.79      17.7      12.8

  Table 8: Comprehensive results of train-time adaptation on PersonaEval-Expertise.




             Model          Top-1 Acc ↑    Top-2 Acc ↑   MR ↓          ECE ↓     BS ↓
        Qwen-max-0shot          35.9           76.3          1.98      29.2      21.0
        Qwen-max-1shot          44.2           76.0          1.90      30.4      20.5
        Qwen-max-3shot          46.3           77.0          1.87      29.8      20.0
        Qwen-max-5shot          46.3           77.1          1.86      30.3      20.1
       DeepSeek-V3-0shot        43.3           83.5          1.78      22.9      17.8
       DeepSeek-V3-1shot        50.5           84.6          1.71      15.8      16.2
       DeepSeek-V3-3shot        53.6           85.5          1.66      15.5      15.7
       DeepSeek-V3-5shot        54.1           86.3          1.65      14.5      15.2

    Table 9: Comprehensive results of few-shot prompting on PersonaEval-Literary.




                                          23

